in this short video we're going to show
you how we use two different animation
techniques both rotoscoping and
traditional hand-drawn animation in the
ted-ed lesson miss gales five steps to
slam poetry a lesson of transformation a
poetry slam is a competition in which
poets are judged on their poems often
four qualities of emotional power
lyrical residents a lesson was created
by Gale Dan Lee a veteran slam poet who
spent decades teaching children to
express themselves through spoken words
a lesson which offers a guide to
creating poetry with immediacy and power
also serves as a great example of
exactly that it's a story told in the
form of a poem that packs a real
emotional punch she introduces Tyler
who's sitting in an 11th grade writing
class struggling with the assignment of
having to write a poem based on a
personal experience the story's told
from two perspectives one external and
one internal this gales narration sets
the stage of the outside world spoken
word artist pages Deema Tom performs
Tyler's inner voice to set these two
realms of inner and outer experience
apart different animation technique was
used to illustrate each the real world
was animated by rotoscoping with a frame
by frame tracing of live-action footage
in black and white line art the
animation depicting the inner stream of
consciousness world of Tyler's memories
was traditionally drawn on paper and
featured watercolor backgrounds in a
more expressionistic design once
deciding on this general approach the
project went right into pre-production
an animation pre-production is the
planning stage all the decisions that
need to be made before going and
actually making the thing in its final
form this can include developing the
look or design of the piece
experimenting with colors and camera
angles revising the script and so on all
these decisions are important because
they determine how much work in time the
production will take extra time spent
here figuring things out can often save
a lot of time down the road for our
project a storyboard was first created
in which the framing composition and
imagery for each shot was determined
then an animatic was made which is
basically a movie of the storyboard this
helped us figure out the timing of each
shot also helped us get an idea of how
well everything would flow together
visually between our rotoscoped and
traditionally animated scenes once they
were assembled for the rotoscope shots
we first had to create the live-action
footage to be traced working with what
we had in our humble office we created a
classroom of desks using only one small
table we shot this multiple times from
each angle the storyboard called for
each time with a different volunteer
from among our coworkers
our source footage elements that needed
to be composited or assembled and
arranged together before we could
rotoscoped them the composite is a
special-effects term for a shot that
combines two or more elements in it that
were created separately to do this we
used After Effects a digital compositing
and motion graphics program the first
step was to isolate the part of the
frame we needed by masking off the
unnecessary negative space or parts of
the frame we didn't need the individual
shots were then each layered into one
composite shot resized and ranged
appropriately to create the illusion of
them all being there in perspective at
the same time every third frame was then
exported as an image sequence ready to
be rotoscoped the tracing was done
digitally drawn directly on a Cintiq
monitor
the rest of the animation was done by
hand on paper
unlike rotoscoping here the timing and
motion of the animation is all planned
out by the animator ahead of time the
appropriate number of drawings are then
done to accomplish the movement each
animation drawing is then scanned
registered in sequence together in the
computer that animation sequence is then
composited with the layered background
art camera moves are then plotted out
and executed
one way that poetry uses language to
communicate emotions and ideas is
through the use of metaphor Mama's lots
of footsteps too many to count
making excuses on blacks no animation is
a medium that's also uniquely
well-suited to communicating emotions
and ideas through visual metaphor
applying the dual techniques of
rotoscoped and traditional animation
each with their own inherent looks
allowed us to visually represent the
dual nature of the creative process
described in the lesson is the internal
aspect of experience in memory which is
mined for inspiration and there's the
external aspect of revealing it to the
world through a structured presentation
we combined both techniques for the last
shots of Tyler delivering his poem to
the world allowing us to convey in a
direct visual way the power of that
moment of communication when internal
becomes external which both poetry and
animation is where the magic happens